---
title: "A History of Rebellion"
date: 2023-10-28
weight: 8
---

The fact that we call ourselves Mizo today is our new nomenclature. In our language, Mizo means those who live in the highlands, that is, those who live in the high land. We have given the collective name Mizo to various groups like Lushei, Kuki, Mahar, Paito, Riang, Pawai, Chakma, Lakher, etc.

So far, we do not have any information-rich old book from which we can know our ancient history. However, from the stories that have been passed down orally from generation to generation, we can know that the oldest inhabitants of this region were the three groups: Lushei, Chin, and Kachin. They probably started living here after gradually advancing through the deep jungle from the distant Chinese border and passing through Burma. Their descendants gradually spread out in this region in different groups. The most influential person of each group used to lead that group. He was called Lal. As the population grew and problems increased, the Lals were constantly at war with the Lals of their neighboring regions. At that time, the war was a duel between the Lals. The two Lals, the chiefs of the two groups, would stand on the border of the two punjees and fight with their conventional weapons. That fight would continue until one of them died. Then the followers of the defeated Lal would be forced to become the followers of the victorious Lal. The victorious Lal would take the skull of the defeated Lal and keep it at home to increase his glory. The Lal who could collect the most skulls was the most influential of that time. In this way, the life of the various groups under the leadership of different Lals was evolving with the flow of time. The Lals could not remain confined to the limited deep forests of the mountains with their gradually increasing population. Due to the pressure of population growth, they were forced to expand the area of their settlement. They gradually spread from the inaccessible regions of the forest to the hilly hillocks near the plains. Their punjees had spread to the jungles adjacent to the border regions of Manipur, Cachar, and Tripura.

When British imperialism was spreading its influence in India like the midday sun and running the administration of the country, the behavior of the ethnic groups of these hilly regions was making them restless. The history of the measures they took to establish the authority of the British government over them reveals a lot about the bravery of the Mizos.

More than one hundred and fifty years ago, in June 1844, 30 Kukis from the Thadoi and Kaiyung bastis in the state of Manipur, under the leadership of their chief, slowly made their way through the deep forests of the inaccessible and terrifying mountains of Burma and launched a reckless attack on another Kuki punjee located in the south of the Banraj pargana of the Cachar district. The attacking Kukis carried out a massive massacre in that punjee and, after taking the heads of eight Kukis, went away again. This attack from the border region of Manipur into Cachar made the bureaucrats of the then government Bahadur worried and they paid attention to making the administrative system effective for it. The then Superintendent, E. R. Lyons, informed the higher authorities, the commissioner of the 15th div, about the above incident in Dhaka. While talking about them, he said that the attacking Kukis are a sub-tribe of the Nagas. They do not consider genocide a crime but a very joyful event. According to their custom, no group chief is buried after his death without placing human skulls in his grave with his dead body, and a person's importance is calculated by the number of human skulls decorated in his house.

"These so-called 'Kookies' are a Naga hill tribe from this region. For them, murder is not a crime but a source of great delight. According to their customs, a chief cannot be buried without a certain number of human skulls placed in the grave, and a man's importance is measured by the number of skulls decorating his house."

After the 30 Kukis of the Thadoi and Kaiyung punjees carried out the massacre under the leadership of their chief, only one Kuki of that group was arrested due to the promptness of Mr. Lyons. Mr. Lyons sent the documents containing the complaint and information to the commissioner of the 15th div so that the judicial sentence would be passed on him. While writing about him, he wrote.

One member of the party has been apprehended who confesses that he accompanied the others at the behest of their rajah for the express purpose of collecting heads. Although he denies involvement in the actual murders, he is clearly an accessory before and after the fact. When the village was attacked, all but one of the men were absent, and it appears unlikely that further evidence will be obtained.

I therefore have the honor to forward, in a separate packet, the "Nuthe." This case is, fortunately, a very unusual one for your perusal and orders before committing the prisoner for trial at the session.

In addition to this, Mr. Lyons requested the Political Agent of Manipur to take his own initiative and persuade the king there so that such sudden attacks do not happen.

Although the British government, for its own convenience, had established an administrative system by dividing the regions of Manipur state, Cachar district, etc. by drawing geographical boundaries, the Lushei, Kuki, and other tribes living in the hills of those regions had kept themselves free from the administrative control of the government. The boundaries of different regions could not hold them back. They followed their own rules and, in their characteristic way, continued their attacks from the punjee of one region to the punjee of another. Although the British government tried to impose its rules on the tribes, the tribes repeatedly ignored them.

On the sixth of November, 1849, from a place eight or ten days' journey south of Cachar, the Lalingbong Raja, that is, Lal Laling Bung, with his two hundred followers armed with single-barreled guns, spears, daos, etc., came and attacked the Shiah Pao punjee, located southwest of the Saidpur village of the Sonapur pargana and near the Maka Chhubri bil in the Cachar district. Laling Bung and his followers bravely began to kill the inhabitants of the Shiah Pao punjee. A total of fourteen women and fifteen men were killed, and the remaining forty-two were taken prisoner. With the intention of leaving a mark of his glory by carrying out a reckless massacre, Laling Bung and his community took the heads from all but one of the twenty-nine dead bodies. Before leaving, they set fire to the Shiah Pao punjee.

The next day, on the 7th of November, on his way back, Laling Bung attacked the punjee of Lalung Kuki and the Agmas punjee, a short distance from Shiah Pao, to the west of the Sabajpur village.
But as the news of the attack on the nearby Shiah Pao punjee spread, all the inhabitants of the Lalung Kuki punjee and the Agmas punjee fled the punjee and many came down to the plains. Lalingbong and his companions set fire to the empty punjee and left. His victory campaign remained unopposed.

At that time, the Superintendent of the Cachar district was Mr. G. Verner. On the day of the incident in the Shiah Pao punjee, in the evening, a boy came to Mr. Verner and reported the news of the reckless massacre and arson. As soon as he heard the news of the Luchai-Kuki attack, Mr. Verner, not finding the daroga nearby, immediately sent the police jamadar to investigate the matter. Mr. Verner waited after sending the police jamadar to know what news he would bring. No news came that night and the next day during the day. At night, the barkandaz returned and reported that he had seen two villages burning in the fire from a distance that afternoon and that the sound of firearms was heard. But he could not guess who was firing where and how.

Mr. Verner himself was thinking of going forward to investigate the incident on the spot.

But would it be right to go suddenly after getting the news from only one boy? Thinking that, Mr. Verner did not go himself. Anyway, after the barkandaz came and gave the news, Mr. Verner again sent an armed barkandaz force of eight people to the spot the next day to verify the truth of the incident. On that very day, about three to four hundred men and women from the Lalung Kuki and Agmas punjees, most of whom were old and children, and only three from the Shiah Pao punjee, gathered before Mr. Verner in a procession. Of course, many people from the plains also came with them and narrated the incident of the above-mentioned Luchai Kuki attack.

Mr. Verner arranged for sepoy guards in their punjee to restore their confidence. But everyone objected to it. They said that the custom of the Luchai Kukis is to kill and take the heads. They never stay in one place for more than a day after an attack. Mr. Verner wrote the same thing to his higher authorities.

— I offered to send out sepoy guards to the different villages, but to that they objected, as they said the Luchayee had left that they never remained more than a day, that their custom was to take the heads of those they killed with them and walk off.

Despite the objection of the inhabitants of the Lalung Kuki and Agmas and other punjees, Mr. Verner sent a team of twelve sepoys including a havildar to Sabajpur to guard.

But when the inhabitants of the punjee started living normally in their places again, the guarding sepoys were withdrawn.
Although normalcy returned to the punjees located on the border of the district, it was temporary.

A few days later, it was heard again that the Luchais would launch their attack. The news naturally made Mr. Verner worried. The sahib had thought that arrangements had to be made so that the Luchai Kukis could not come and launch a large-scale attack on the punjees located on the border of the Cachar district. So he wrote to his higher authority, the then Sessions Judge of Sylhet, H. Stainforth, that it would be reasonable to send some troops from the Sylhet Light Infantry Battalion so that they could be deployed in the border areas to protect the people there from the sudden attacks of the Luchai Kukis. He wrote to Stainforth,

.... that there was a rumour that the Luchayee Kookies intended returning again to this district for the purpose of securing Jhum of the villages they had attacked and burnt or some other purpose;
I have thought is advisable to send guards from the Sylhet Light Infantry Battalion down to the southward of 1 Habildar and 12 sepoys each, the one to Soonabarooie ghat pergunnah Soonapur the other to Nudeergram Pergunnah Bundraj in order to protect the people of the plain from the incursion.


After receiving Mr. Verner's letter, Judge Stainforth ordered him to inquire thoroughly about these warlike tribes. When the whole of India is subjugated to British imperialism, can it be tolerated that the tribes living in the jungles of the mountains will ignore the British administrative system and continue to attack according to their whims? They have to come under British rule somehow. No matter how warlike they are, they have to be subdued by British rule.

After receiving the order from Sessions Judge Stainforth, Mr. Verner became active. The desire to do adventurous work arose in his mind. He himself tried to become aware of the information and activities of the Luchai Kukis. He set out from the Silchar headquarter town towards the previously attacked Shiah Pao punjee, located in the southern border region, far away. The experience he had after reaching there, he wrote to Mr. Stainforth while narrating it —


On the 22nd instant I went out myself to the place where Seyahpow's people were murdered. It is far in the jungles, I found it deserted.... I found great difficulties in getting there, for after crossing the Boaljoor river the road became so bad that we were obliged to go the greater part of the way along a single stick raised from two or three feet from the ground on account of the marshes. It was very fatiguing and I must say I never passed over so wretched a path in my life.

The experience that Mr. Verner gained by going to the Shiah Pao punjee himself did not deter his enthusiasm to collect information about the Luchais, but rather inspired his inquisitive mind to collect information about the Luchai Kukis in various ways. He truly continued his investigation to know about the Luchai Kukis. The knowledge he gained about the Luchai Kukis through his enthusiasm and efforts created a foundation for the later British bureaucrats to bring the Luchai, Kuki, and other tribes under their administrative system.
Mr. Verner wrote and expressed everything he had learned to Judge Stainforth.

He wrote-

I have been able to ascertain that the Luchayee Kookies are a very large and war-like tribe who reside some eight or ten days' journey south of Cachar. They are well known by the Kookies who reside in this district, for many of them were on friendly terms with them formerly, and they live near to one another and it is supposed that the cause for enmity now shown is owing to their having left them and taken up the abode here. They say the Luchayees live nearer to Chittagong within four or five days journey and that they go there for the purpose of making their bazars, as they do also sometimes to Comilla, but that they are quite independent of the Tipperah Rajah and live far away from Aggurtalla; The place described by them as the Luchayee country tallies exactly with Pemberton's map for on it I find the Longshie or Lusai tribe down as inhabiting a tract of country between the 92 and 93 degrees of East longitude and some miles to the North and South of the 23 degree of north latitude and immediately to the Tipperah hill district: The Poitoo Kookies are those who reside near Aggurtulla. All Kookies appear to be gradually migrating westward and are continually at war amongst themselves.

After taking all this information, it became apparent to Mr. Verner that it would be very difficult to stop the Luchai Kukis from their continuous sudden attacks and massacres. Because, before the incident happens, the police barkandaz cannot know anything in advance about their movements and sudden attacks. Moreover, it is also doubtful how effective it would be to take action by sending the army. In reality, it is also a question of whether the army will be able to reach the right place to achieve its purpose. So Mr. Verner informed Stainforth -


With reference to the practicality of sending troops against the Luchayee from this I am of the opinion that it would be attended with great difficulty. There is no road, and the path they would require to follow runs through nothing but jungle, over swamps and uninhabited hills.

In this way, as the days passed, more information was collected. Exchange of news continued between the higher and lower government bureaucrats and various measures were taken to suppress them. Orders came from the higher authorities to use the army. Accordingly, Lieutenant Colonel Lister of the military force took some of his army to the area adjacent to the border region in January 1850. He attacked and destroyed one or two bastis there with great force for a little over a fortnight. After doing this much, Mr. Lister himself got discouraged. He was forced to return with his companions. While reporting on this victory campaign of Mr. Lister, Mr. Verner wrote to Stainforth,

I have the honour to report that Lt. Col Lister with the detachment of his corps with which he proceeded from this against the Luchayee Kookies on the 4th instant returned this morning (23rd January). He attacked and destroyed one or two of their villages, I believe he found his force too small to proceed with against the others, the Luchayee being a much more powerful tribe than he had any idea of and the difficulties of getting at them increasing every step as he advanced, and as his retreat might have been not off without difficulty....

The experience that Lieutenant Colonel Lister gained by carrying out the campaign with great enthusiasm, from that he guessed that the success he had achieved in his campaign could not suppress the Luchai tribe, but rather that attack would encourage them to be vengeful. So Mr. Lister, after retreating, said something, on the occasion of which Mr. Verner wrote to Stainforth-

As this attack has emboldened the Luchayee than otherwise any as they are of a most vindictive nature Col. Lister has determined on leaving 4 companies of his corps in Cachar for the present in order to protect the people as much as possible from any future incursions.

Unable to locate the actual position of the Luchai Kuki punjees and their routes of movement in the deep forest, Lieutenant Colonel deployed the army in the border region of the Cachar district so that at least the Luchai Kukis could not enter the district and continue their practice of launching attacks. On the other hand, the bureaucrats of the government Bahadur became desperate and active on how to bring the warlike Luchai Kuki tribes under their control by penetrating the inaccessible forest path.

The bureaucrat force of the British government, by posting soldiers to guard the border region of the Cachar Mizo district, only kept thinking about how to suppress the Luchais - how to bring the Luchai hills under the British kingdom. On the other hand, the Luchais continued their attacks at an unabated pace. In January 1871, the powerful young Lal of the Sailo group, Shri Benkhunia, launched a series of attacks on various tea gardens located in the border region of the Cachar district. He killed the then sahib doctor of the Alexandrapur tea garden in Katlicherra of the present Hailakandi subdivision, James Winchester, and took his infant daughter, Mary Winchester, with him. At that time, some local people living in the tea garden were taken prisoner. From January to February 1871, the Luchai attacks continued on the Cachar border. It was not only under the leadership of the Sailo Lal Benkhunia. The attacks were organized under the leadership of the Lals of various Mizo groups. British imperialism was harassed by the continuous attacks of the Luchai Kukis. They became desperate and made a fuss to bring them under their control as soon as possible. But alas - it was difficult to reach their real hideout by penetrating the inaccessible forest path!
Anyway, in the end, the British army under the leadership of General Boucher from the Cachar district penetrated the inaccessible forest path and entered the interior of the Mizo hills and brought some of the Lals of the Sailo group under their control. They skillfully made friends with them. Then Lal Bothang Puiya, at the behest of the British, went to the punjee of Benkhunia Lal and was able to persuade him to return the infant daughter of Dr. James Winchester, Mary Winchester, and the native prisoners. The then Lt. Collord Roberts, who later became the Commander-in-chief of the British Army, was in this campaign led by General Boucher. Along with the campaign led by General Boucher from the Cachar district, a team of the British army from Chittagong also set out for the Mizo hills under the leadership of General Brownlow.

Although General Boucher's campaign entered the hills and brought many Lals under control and brought back Mary Winchester and others, it could not establish British authority in the Mizo hills. Later, Lt. John Stewart of the Gorkha Regiment was killed in a surprise attack by the Chin group's Lal Haosata. After Stewart's death, the British military force became angry and launched another campaign under the leadership of Capt. Shakespeare. Capt. Shakespeare penetrated further into the forest south of the Kolodyne river and brought a vast area of the Mizo hills under British authority. But even then, the sudden attacks of the Mizos continued. So they tried to calm the situation there by appointing military authorities as Political Officers. But the situation there did not calm down. It continued like this for a long time.

Herbert R. Browne, the son of Ulick Browne, a member of the English nobility, came to India as a British bureaucrat after crossing the sea. Lord Clive, centered on the East India Company, spread the English influence all over India and spread the glory of British imperialism. And Herbert R. Browne was a son of that country. He had thought that if Lord Clive could establish such a feat, then why couldn't he, with a small border, subjugate the tribes of the Luchai hills and keep his glory intact? No matter how powerful the hill Luchai Kukis were, they would have to bow down to British imperialism. They had to be subjugated somehow. With this firm self-confidence, Captain Herbert R. Browne of the Bengal Staff Corps had come with the responsibility of the Political Officer of the Luchai hills. He became very active in subjugating the Luchais. But alas! What Herbert R. Browne had thought about the inhabitants of the Luchai hills from the various cities of India did not match the reality on the ground. There was a big difference. There were many obstacles, many difficulties in applying what he had thought. But no, even if there were many obstacles and difficulties, they had to be accepted and the Luchais had to be suppressed somehow. They had to be made to understand that no matter how much they killed each other, they would not be able to stand up to British imperialism. The whole world knows the glory of British imperialism - knows its power. And the Luchais are nothing. The young Herbert R. Browne was going on with this morale. But in the end, he could not. All the pride he had in his own strength and morale broke down like a house of cards - it was reduced to dust. In September 1890, when Herbert R. Browne was advancing towards Chengsil in the Luchai hills with his companions, he was attacked by a surprise attack of the Luchais. Mr. Herbert R. Browne could not repel the sudden attack of the Luchais. His pride, strength, and presence of mind were all shattered in a moment. He was seriously injured in the attack of the Luchais. He breathed his last there that very day.

After being seriously injured and dying on the way to Chengsil, the dead body of Captain Herbert R. Browne of the Bengal Staff Corps and the Political Officer of the Luchai hills was brought to the headquarter town of Silchar. His dead body was, of course, brought with special ceremony and military honors. In those days, after the death of the sahibs living in the Cachar district, Browne sahib was buried with honors in the graveyard located on the side of the present Silchar Mission Road. On his tombstone, it is written,


In loving memory of Capt. Herbert R. Browne, Bengal Staff Corps, Political Officer, Lushai Hills.
Son of Lord Ulick Browne.
Mortally wounded by Lushais on September 9, 1890, during his journey to Chengsil, where he passed away the same day at the age of 31 years.


Next to the grave of Captain Herbert R. Browne, the son of Lord Ulick Browne, there are the graves of two other sahibs. One is the previously mentioned Dr. James Winchester, who was killed by Benkhunia, and the other is Peter Blyth. What is engraved on the tombstone of Mr. James Winchester's grave is.

This stone is erected by the European inhabitants of Cachar in memory of James Winchester, who was killed in a Lushai attack on Alexandrapore Garden on January 23, 1871.


And what is written on the tombstone on Mr. Peter Blyth's grave is

Erected by public subscription, this monument commemorates Peter Blyth, who died on January 27, 1880, during a raid by Amgaini Nagas on Baladon Tea Garden.

When they were buried and their stories were written on the tombstones on their graves, the organizers must have thought that this memorial plaque would carry their stories for ages.
Their future generations would come here and see and remember their ancestors.

At that time, the intoxicated followers of British imperialism were hoping that just as they were advancing in victory in all directions, they would continue to advance in the same way. The stories of their valor and bravery would remain immortal. But history is very cruel. Their hopes were not fulfilled. Their victory campaign declined. British imperialism had to retreat. They were forced to give up the direct rule. After leaving the direct rule and leaving India, many signs of their valor and bravery gradually sank into the abyss of time.
Here too, in the graveyard located in the city of Silchar, the glory of the story written on the memorial plaques on the graves of James Winchester, Peter Blyth, and the Political Officer of the Luchai hills, Herbert R. Browne, which had been carrying the responsibility of conveying their stories to their future generations, gradually faded. After the followers of British imperialism left, their future generations no longer come here to remember the memory of their ancestors.

After the death of the Political Officer, Herbert R. Browne, the British military force became very angry. They launched a strong campaign for the third time in 1891. But at that time too, the Political Officer, Mr. Murrey, was killed in Lunglei, being attacked by the Pawai group's Lal Zakhapa. Although the Political Officer was killed by the Pawai Lal Zakhapa, it was in this campaign that the British Raj established its authority over the Luchai hills as a whole.
