---
title: "Winds of Change"
date: 2023-10-28
weight: 9
---

The days are moving forward. A lot of water has flowed down the Kolodyne, Saireng, and other rivers of the Mizo district. The flow of water has not stopped. The armed campaign of Thu-Aya, Jitinga, Yangaya, Rema, and others is flowing like the Kolodyne river. Sometimes like the swift current of the monsoon. And sometimes like the gentle current of a river with sandbanks in winter. During the four long years of the armed struggle of the Mizo rebels, Rema had never come down to the plains. After a long time, Rema came to the city of Silchar with two of her companions. In the early days of the armed struggle in the Mizo hills, the Mizos who came down to the plains naturally moved around in fear. At that time, they were often harassed on the public roads by some classes of people from the plains. But it is not like that anymore. As Rema entered the city and walked along the main road towards the center of Silchar, what she saw seemed new to her. From the side of the Zoram Hotel, on the wall next to the main road, it was written in large red letters,

"We support the Mizo War of Liberation" "We support the armed struggle of the Mizo people." Although she was a little surprised to see the writing on the wall, she was somewhat happy in her mind. It seemed that the days were gone when the people or the student community would go on strike to inform the government that the Mizo rebels must be suppressed immediately. But what is the purpose of writings like "We support the Mizo War of Liberation" or "We support the armed struggle of the Mizos"? Have they understood that the path of the armed movement of the Mizos is correct? Have they understood that to be truly free from the clutches of oppression and persecution, the Mizos have to move forward in this way? What the Mizos have done is right. Perhaps thinking all this, they are supporting the Mizos. Otherwise, why would the people of the plains support the Mizos? Of course, the general population of the plains is constantly facing a daily crisis. If the crisis of the people is not resolved by the policies followed by the ruling class - if the people cannot become self-reliant and, on the other hand, the ruling apparatus of the ruling class brutally suppresses and squeezes everything out of them, then how will they accept that ruling class as their own? They have probably understood day by day that the ruling apparatus that is over them is essentially a machine for exploiting the general population. The ruling apparatus is being operated as a puppet of imperialism and feudalism. Therefore, this ruling system cannot bring about the true liberation of the people. This ruling system will surely ignore the various ethnic groups. All these thoughts will perhaps lead the people of the plains forward in the path of their future liberation struggle. Perhaps thinking about the future, they are supporting our armed struggle today. It is difficult to say how much material benefit this moral support will bring us today. But the consolation is that they are supporting us. Rema was walking on, thinking all this.

That evening, Rema was resting with her two companions in a dilapidated hut in the upper part of the city. The owner of the house, Rolson, was a government employee. They were, of course, loyal Mizos according to the official version. Rolson came home from the office in the evening. It is natural for the homeowner to be afraid when those who are directly involved in the armed struggle come to meet in this environment in this way or suddenly come for some other reason, but the sincere love and respect they have for them never allows the homeowner to be terrified. So Rolson welcomed their arrival with great respect. He was happy. He also pulled up a chair and sat next to them. Rolson, leaning back in his chair, said,

— When did you come?

— It will be about an hour.

— Have you eaten anything?

— Yes, Mrs. Rolson has fed us a lot and entertained us.

— Where will she feed you a lot from? At most, tea and biscuits. What more is there?

— No, no, she has fed us a lot. You don't have to worry about that. I saw that your wife is very good at serving guests. Well, anyway. Now tell me, what's your news?

— The news is good.

— Good is good.

— What's the news here?

— Personal news is routine. I am somehow passing the days. Of course, I remember you all very much sometimes.

— It is natural to remember.

— Remembering you is all. I can't go any further than that. Saying this, Rolson became a little absent-minded, and a shadow of sadness fell on his face. Although the dim light of the hurricane dispelled the darkness of the room, there was a hazy feeling. In that dim light, Rolson's sad face attracted Rema's attention. To console Rolson, she said, "No, it is not possible for you to do more than this. You have no reason to be sad about it. You better tell me now what kind of opinion the people here have about us."

Hearing Rema's question, Rolson seemed to have found a lost piece of news. He said,

— Hey, I saw a piece of news in the newspaper a few days ago.

— In which newspaper?

— The Hindustan Standard.

— What news did you see?

— The news is that in a secretly circulated pamphlet here in the Cachar district, the oppressed people have been called to struggle. The correspondent, based on that, is writing that if the "Extremists" here continue their activities, then in the near future, they may have contact with the rebels in the neighboring Mizo district. If appropriate measures are not taken soon, then security and peace will be disturbed later.

The newspaper report made an impression on Rema's mind. The oppressed people have been called to struggle in a secretly circulated pamphlet, and if the Extremists continue their activities, then in the near future, they may have contact with the rebels in the neighboring Mizo district. Do the people rush into a struggle just by being called? Is there no need for a guiding force to control the people's struggle? For inevitable reasons, those who are exploited, those who are oppressed, will struggle for their liberation. But that will not be achieved just by distributing secret pamphlets. Where is that vanguard party, equipped with the fundamental principles of liberation, to organize the exploited and oppressed people and strike at the root of oppression and exploitation in a united way? Which will attract the general population to build a healthy, exploitation-free society. Which will naturally gather real strength and push imperialism to the brink of destruction. Will those whom the newspaper correspondent has referred to as Extremists fill the void of that vanguard party? Or is the correspondent just trying to talk about some unruly and secessionist force? Whatever the correspondent's version may be, it is true that when the general population, that is, the productive force of society, understands that a handful of people with vested interests are hampering the progress of society on a large scale to serve their own vested interests, then the people will naturally stand up against the ruling apparatus, the tool created by the vested interests, which is an obstacle to the progress of society. Not only that, they will move forward to bring about a radical change in it. Then surely, the vanguard party, equipped with the fundamental principles of liberation and progress, will lead the general population on the path to achieving their goals. Journalists present news through newspapers from different perspectives to reflect their purpose. Today, they are printing in the newspapers that if the oppressed people of the plains respond to the call for struggle, then in the coming days, they may have contact with the Mizo rebels, and peace and security will be disturbed. But the question is, why are the oppressed people going to struggle? Or why are the Mizos fighting a life-and-death battle with arms? Are they propagating the correct information about this through their newspapers? Or...

For a long time, the peace and security of the Mizo ethnic group have been disturbed, and the Mizo rebels are fighting to remedy that. And naturally, those who had been disturbing their peace and security in peace and security for so long, today their peace and security are being disturbed. The matter of the inhabitants of the plains is also somewhat similar. How much security is there in the public life of the peasants, workers, and the general middle class today? Are they not all caught in a terrible economic crisis? Has the feudal exploitation system in the rural areas today not created a stage where the peasant and his family are moving towards death throughout the year through terrible sorrow and hardship? Where is the security of the lives of the peasants and their wives and children today? Where is the security of the workers in the industrial areas and the general middle class in the cities? If at some time the workers, peasants, and the general middle class, for the sake of their own survival, raise their heads and move forward with their own demands, then is not the roller of the exploitation machine, the bearer of the vested interests, brutally run over them? Then where is the security of the general working people? For whose security is this kind of ruling apparatus used? If this general population understands that the group of a handful of vested interests is constantly disturbing their peace and security by pressing down the millstone of rule to protect their peace and security, then naturally, to remedy that, the working people will become militant and uproot the machine of rule and exploitation. Then, indeed, the peace and security of the handful of bearers of vested interests will be disturbed. The newspaper correspondent, perhaps understanding this, is hinting that it is necessary to be strict with them now, otherwise there will be trouble later. The owner of the newspaper has appointed him to report the news, has taken the responsibility of his livelihood. In such a situation, if that clerk journalist cannot warn the protectors of the owner group in time, then how will it work? Not doing this would be complete treachery!

At first, the newspaper owners were loudly propagating through the newspapers that the Mizo rebels were doing anti-state work as puppets of the Christian missionaries. They used to propagate that the reason behind the daily outburst of protests of the Naga, Mizo, and other tribal groups was the instigation of the Christian missionaries. Based on that, opinions were expressed in various ways to take action against the Christian missionaries. As a result, the government Bahadur withdrew the permission to stay in this country for some Christian missionaries, among whom were some good doctors. Of course, some of them returned to their home country, stayed for a few days, and then came back here and are living comfortably. But as the days passed, the tone of the newspaper owners also began to change. Now, of course, they are not making much of a fuss about the Christian missionaries in the armed movements of various tribal groups. They are publishing sensational news that China is supporting the armed movements of the Mizos and other rebels. Every few days, news is published that the security forces have raided the secret hideouts of the Mizos and seized a large amount of ammunition and modern weapons. There are Chinese markings on them. Again, news is published that it has been learned from very reliable sources that the volunteers of the Mizo National Front are learning the tactics of guerrilla warfare in China. And sometimes they write that the Mizos are learning the tactics of fighting with modern weapons in a base in Chittagong, Pakistan, under the supervision of China and with the help of the then Pakistan government. While reporting all this news, instead of pointing out the incompetence of the border security force or the defense force, China or Pakistan is blamed more. But why? Today, if the Mizo rebels, showing their thumbs to all the efforts of the defense and other forces who are engaged in completely suppressing the Mizos, can cross the border and go elsewhere to consolidate their strength, then whose fault is it? Is it not motivated to express vitriol only against China without giving importance to the failure to bring the Mizo rebels under control even after creating new nets in the internal administrative system? Are they trying to cover up the real truth like covering a fish with a vegetable...

No matter how many tricks are used to mislead the general population by presenting news in various ways, today the fighting people of various countries will surely pave the way for socialism by crippling the imperialist power day by day. Of course, in doing so, they will have to face various obstacles. If the people of various countries want to fulfill their desire to be truly independent by freeing themselves from the clutches of imperialist exploitation, they will surely have to go through various sorrows and hardships. It will not be possible to disable the ruling system run in the interests of the imperialists and establish a new ruling system without facing sorrow, hardship, or disaster. The people will move forward to establish a new ruling system by facing sorrow, hardship, and disaster.

Rema's mind was moving forward, centered on the news published in the Hindustan Standard, which Mr. Rolson had mentioned. One by one, all the above thoughts were floating in his mind. There is no count of how many sleepless nights Rema has spent thinking about some incident or subject in this way. Today too, perhaps Rema's thoughts would have gone further in the same way. But Mrs. Rolson interrupted it. She also came and sat in a seat next to them. After a brief conversation between Mr. Rolson and Rema, when Rema immersed herself in the world of thought, everyone in the room sat quietly. Mrs. Rolson did not like sitting silently in the room like this. She broke her silence and said to Rema - "Well, what's the news of Rosangi?" Hearing Mrs. Rolson's voice, Rema seemed to have come to her senses. She could not understand who Mrs. Rolson was asking about. She completely tore her mind away from the world of thought and, looking at Mrs. Rolson, said,

— Whose news did you ask?

— I am talking about Rosangi.

— Yes, Rosangi is fine.

— What does she do now?

— She is working for the Medical Corps. At first, of course, she had some difficulties. Now everything is fine. Seeing her work, it seems she can treat better than a qualified doctor.

— Is that so?

— Yes.

— Rosangi is truly great. We cannot do what she is doing by dedicating herself in this way. You know, there is a Bengali young man in our office who often tells me why I am doing a government job being a Mizo? Why don't I join the armed struggle of the Mizos?

— Then what do you say in reply to that?

— What else can I say? I say, let those who are struggling, struggle, what is it to me? I don't need to struggle. I need a job, so I am doing a job. But do you know the real truth? Even though I say this, the young man's question actually hurts me a lot. I think the young man is right. The Mizo boys and girls are fighting a life-and-death battle. They are fighting against rule and exploitation - they are fighting to live freely, and I am just doing slavery here for the sake of my livelihood.

Saying all this, Mrs. Rolson seemed to become a little absent-minded. Rema also listened to her words. She did not say anything. Keeping the time in mind, they thought that there was no point in staying up late. Now let's finish the night's meal and slowly go to bed. Thinking this, they got up.

The next morning, after waking up, Rema and her two colleagues took leave of Mr. and Mrs. Rolson and set out. They did not give the Rolsons any hint of where they were going and in which direction. They also did not ask any questions about it. After leaving Rolson's house, the three Mizos walked along the main road. As they were walking, a colleague said to Rema,

— The way Mr. and Mrs. Rolson treated us was not bad. It must be said to be quite good.

— Yes, no news, no message, we suddenly appeared at their place after a long time. But they were not embarrassed or scared by that.

— But I had a doubt in my mind until the moment I went to their place. Who knows if the gentleman will give us a place to stay.

— Why won't he give us a place to stay? Even if he can't join us directly, he can't ignore us. Didn't you hear how he asked about the news here?

— I heard that. Hearing all this and seeing his behavior, I am saying that he is not bad, he is good.

— Yes, he is good.

Talking in this way, they walked side by side and reached the motor stand. They had to go a few miles by motor and then walk again to reach the designated punjee. So Rema and her colleagues got on a bus. The bus was still empty. But as soon as Rema got on, it became crowded. In a short time, the bus was completely full of passengers. The pressure of the crowd of passengers created an uncomfortable, stuffy atmosphere inside the bus. Everyone was thinking that it would be good if the bus left. Rema was sitting by the window. She was looking outside. She saw posters pasted side by side on the wall. Although she could not understand all the writing well, she could understand the large letters. The poster said, "Down with the Indira-Ne Win conspiracy to suppress the revolutionary people," "Long live the fighting people of Burma," "Long live the martyr Thakin Than Tun," etc. Rema was as surprised to see these posters today as she had been to see the writing on the wall in the past. The words "Down with the Indira-Ne Win conspiracy to suppress the revolutionaries," "Long live the fighting people of Burma," etc. started to stir in her mind. She thought, what is the Indira-Ne Win conspiracy to suppress the revolutionaries? In Burma, various ethnic groups are fighting with arms for their liberation. In the eastern border of India too, various ethnic groups are fighting. Therefore, both governments have to continue their efforts to suppress those various ethnic groups. In such a situation, has the Indira-Ne Win government decided to take any joint action? If there is such an understanding between the two countries, then are they trying to call it the "Indira-Ne Win conspiracy to suppress the revolutionaries"?

Be that as it may, the sympathetic posters that are being put up here today for the fighting people of Burma and the leader of the Maoist Communist Party, Thakin Than Tun, who was killed in an encounter with the Ne Win government's army, will naturally terrify the servants of imperialism.
Today, the imperialists are becoming active, keeping in mind what form the armed struggle of the various ethnic groups of Burma, the Mizo struggle of the Mizo hills, and the struggle of the Nagas will take in the coming days, and what China's role in it may be. The servants of the imperialists are writing in various newspapers, indirectly hinting at the rate of China's communication and support in the armed campaign that has been going on from the border region of Yunnan in China to the eastern border of India, even if they do not say it directly. They have written that —

Among the primary insurgent groups in Burma, collaborating closely with China, are the Eastern Naga Revolutionary Council, the Kachin Independence Army, and organized elements of Shan, Kayah, and Chin rebels, including the pro-Phizo wing of the "Naga Federal Government." The Mizo National Front also cooperates with these groups.

From what else they have written, it is understood that a captain of the Burma army, Mr. Naw Seng, went into hiding in 1948 without permission. He encouraged the Kachins, the hill dwellers of the northeastern region of Burma, to fight with arms to become independent. Then, by chance, he went to China. From there, he returned to the country with guerrilla fighters trained in China and strengthened the armed struggle for the "North East Command of Free Kachins." By gathering active support day by day, Mr. Naw Seng is moving forward to build the "North East Command of Free Kachins."

On the other hand, the Eastern Naga Revolutionary Council is moving forward to achieve its purpose by consolidating its strength. Although they have strengthened their activities in the Nagahills district of Burma, they have contact with the underground Nagas of the Naga hills of India. Under the leadership of Brigadier Bau Naung of the E.N.R.C., they often enter the Nagaland state of India and organize attacks in collusion with the rebel Nagas.
From the news that reaches Assam and Nagaland from the northern and northwestern regions of Burma, it is understood that the Chinese advisers directly participate in the attacks of those Nagas. In those regions, the Chinese pretend to be ordinary businessmen or artisans and, at the right time, lead the rebels. Not only that, a large number of ethnically similar hill dwellers from the Yunnan province of China come and live with the rebels. It is very difficult to distinguish them from the Burmese inhabitants there.

Moreover, more than five hundred Kukis, Chins, and Mizos were collected from the Upper Chindwin district of Burma and secretly taken to East Pakistan in the latter part of 1969. There, a Kuki leader from Burma, Mr. Thangvill, trained them in guerrilla warfare. In the Chin hills of Burma, which is located on the border of India, various ethnic groups or small groups are carrying out extensive destructive activities. The newspapers have, of course, mentioned that all the groups that are carrying out destructive activities there are doing so with the direct help and instructions of communist China. The "Stillwell Road" located there, that is, the "Assam-Burma-China Road," which was built during the Second World War to maintain the supply system with China. The pro-Chinese are maintaining their authority over it and are carrying out their work in these regions according to China's instructions so that now, in the movements of various ethnic groups, they can always maintain the supply system for all necessary things from China through it. Keeping that in mind, they are not only instigating the Kukis, Chins, and Mizos living in Burma to carry on an armed struggle, but are also giving instructions and help to the Mizo rebels of the Mizo hills of India to cross the border and launch attacks on the neighboring Chin hills of Burma. That is why the Mizo rebels of India cross the border and launch surprise attacks on the neighboring Chin hills of Burma. In 1968, they looted the government offices and treasury in Tiddim and Falam in the Chin hills. Now the question is, why would the people of the Mizo National Front take the Mizo rebels of India and launch such a surprise attack on the Chin hills of Burma? Mentioning all these incidents, the correspondents are propagating their news in various ways. Among them, they have also written that,

Greater cooperation and closer coordination between India and Burma in political, economic, and security spheres appear to be the imperative need of the hour. The coming months will undoubtedly pose greater difficulties for both nations, and their future largely depends on how these new challenges are faced.

Yes, in the coming days, the situation will undoubtedly become complicated due to the armed struggle of the ethnic groups in both countries. How will the governments of the two countries deal with it? When the ethnic groups of both countries are fighting against the established government, then to deal with it, the governments of both countries need to build good cooperation and coordination among themselves. The various ethnic groups of the two countries and the armed struggle led by the fighting people can create a complicated situation, and perhaps realizing that, the various journalists of the newspapers are trying to warn their masters by making the above comments.

After seeing the posters on the wall, all this was floating in Rema's mind while sitting in the crowded bus. By then, the bus was moving at its own pace. It stopped on the road from time to time. Many passengers also got on and off. But Rema did not pay much attention to that. Her mind was moving forward, centered on the above news. At one point, the bus reached their destination. A colleague brought Rema back to her senses and said that they had to get off here.
