---
title: "The Final Resolve"
date: 2023-10-28
weight: 122
---

After Rangchwanga and the others came out of jail, the situation in the Mizo hills began to change rapidly. Although armed clashes between the security forces and the hostile Mizos were taking place in the Jhumpai region near Aizawl and other hilly areas, and casualties were occurring on both sides, those news items were not given due importance, and the activities of the city-based political parties of the Mizo hills began to gain prominence. Discussions were held with the Prime Minister and other leaders of the Government of India in Delhi about the political situation in the Mizo district, and a demand was made to transform the Mizo district into a full-fledged state. In the meantime, headlines began to appear in the newspapers that a number of Mizo National Front workers were coming to an understanding with the government.

On the other hand, great changes were also taking place in the all-India sphere. A treaty was signed between India and Soviet Russia. Then, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, unable to bear the inhuman atrocities of Yahya Khan on the people of East Pakistan, with a humanitarian impulse (!), helped to establish the Mujibur government in the end by defeating Yahya Khan's army there with Indian troops. At that time, the victory of the Indira government was being hailed, and the situation was at its peak. Indira Gandhi was even being called a goddess incarnate. A few days after that, on January 21, 1972, Shrimati Indira Gandhi made a historic announcement. Along with declaring Meghalaya, Tripura, and Manipur as full-fledged states, she also made an announcement about Arunachal and the Mizo hills. She arranged for the first election to be held on April 18. On the scheduled day, the election in Mizoram was held peacefully. A total of 160 candidates stood for the thirty seats in the legislative assembly and one seat in the Lok Sabha. Among them, fifteen candidates were given from the Mizo National Front workers who had come to an understanding with the government - one for the Lok Sabha seat and the remaining 14 for the legislative assembly seats. After the election results were announced, it was seen that the Mizo rebels (by their former identity) could not win a single seat. The Mizo Union won the majority of the seats. In the legislative assembly, the Mizo Union got twenty-one seats, the Mizo Congress got six, and the independent candidates got three. The Lok Sabha seat was won by Mr. Sangliana of the Mizo Union. A government was formed under the leadership of Mr. C. Chhunga, the leader of the Mizo Union.

The situation that arose as a result of the activities of the open political parties in the Mizo hills and the policies followed by the government made General Thu-Aya, Yangaya, and others think. Of course, General Thu-Aya knows that in a revolutionary struggle, sometimes the obstacles become stronger than the favorable conditions. At that time, the obstacles are the main aspect of the contradiction. The favorable condition is the secondary aspect. But it is possible to overcome the obstacles step by step through the efforts of the revolutionaries. Therefore, today the Mizo rebels have to analyze the real situation correctly. Has the ruling class adopted the policy regarding the Mizo hills in the interest of the Mizo people? Or has it adopted this measure in a very clever way to stop the turbulent wave of the Mizo national struggle from washing away everything of their authority like straw? As the days go by, its purpose and results will surely become clear to the people.
The people of the Mizo hills - not only the people of the Mizo hills, but what is the attitude of the bearers of the vested interests towards all the hill dwellers of the entire eastern region? Their real purpose is to take measures in the case of the eastern hill people, keeping in mind the larger interests of the vested interests at the all-India level. On November 7, 1950, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel wrote a letter to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, mentioning the hill dwellers of the eastern region and what China's role towards them could be. The letter that Patel wrote to Nehru is -

We consider ourselves friends of China, yet they do not reciprocate this sentiment. Their communist ideology dictates that anyone not explicitly aligned with them is an adversary, a critical point we must acknowledge.

Let us now examine the political vulnerabilities along this potentially problematic border. Our northern and northeastern flanks encompass Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkim, Darjeeling, and the tribal regions of Assam. From a communications standpoint, these are weak areas. Continuous defensive lines are absent, offering almost limitless opportunities for infiltration. Police presence is minimal, confined to a small number of passes, and even there, our outposts appear understaffed.

These regions lack close and intimate ties with us. Their inhabitants do not demonstrate established loyalty or devotion to India. Even Darjeeling and Kalimpong are not immune to pro-Mongoloid biases. Over the past three years, our efforts to engage the Nagas and other hill tribes in Assam have yielded little progress. I am confident that China, and their inspiration, Soviet Russia, will exploit these vulnerabilities to further their ambitions.

At the time when the British were directly leaving India, the attitude of the Mizo people to live with a separate and independent identity was prevalent. At that time, of course, some quarters had declared their intention to live independently. Some even advocated for the Mizo hills to join Burma. Again, on the eve of the British leaving directly, in 1947, the British constitutional expert, Professor Coupland, had given his opinion in the context of establishing a separate independent state called the "Crown Colony of Eastern Agency" with the hilly areas of Burma, Assam, and Chittagong (whose inhabitants were almost all Christians and hill people), which of course included the Naga hills, Mizo hills, and other regions. But at that time, those proposals were not implemented, and the Mizo hills, Naga hills, and other regions were included in India. But since that arrangement was not entirely satisfactory to all the people there, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel had to write to Prime Minister Nehru within three years of the British leaving that,

during the last three years we have not been able to make any appreciable approaches to the Nagas and the hill tribes in Assam.

At present, the measures that the government is taking to solve the problem of the Mizo hills by compromising with the open political parties of the Mizo hills have not been able to completely satisfy the people of the Mizo hills. A number of Mizo National Front workers, after coming out of jail or by directly surrendering to the government, have joined the elections and, by singing the praises of the great development of Mizoram under the central rule, have temporarily caused a decline in the revolutionary struggle of the general population, but they will not be able to save the situation in the end. The people will move forward again. Through the efforts of the armed fighters who are properly equipped with politics, they will overcome the obstacles step by step and create new favorable conditions. Today's unfavorable situation will give way to a favorable situation.
General Thu-Aya and Yangaya were talking in a secret base of the armed Mizo rebels in the Mizo hills. Various blows could not shake them from their duty even a little. The fire of the mantra of fighting like a vigilant soldier until victory, until the last drop of blood in their bodies, is constantly flowing in their veins. At present, the creation of a separate centrally administered Mizo state or the abandonment of the armed path by a number of Mizo National Front workers has not been able to disappoint them. They are analyzing it specifically and are rather gaining experience. Various steps have to be crossed to continue the struggle until victory, and the present event is just an indication of crossing one of those steps. What has happened in the Mizo hills today has not happened by ignoring the armed movement of the Mizo rebels. Perhaps many have accepted the proposal of a separate centrally administered Mizo state today, being afraid of the hard struggle that has to be carried on to reach the real goal, that is, to be truly independent. But this proposal has come because the armed Mizo struggle is going on. Otherwise, the question of forming a separate centrally administered Mizo state would not have come up in this way at this time. Who are the happiest today that Mizoram has become a Union Territory? Which workers of the Mizo National Front have joined the elections?

Those who were the Lals of the punjees during the British imperialist rule, that is, the Mizo chiefs, those who were well-off, are the happiest today that the Mizo hills have been declared the Mizoram Union Territory. Their leadership is being established there today. Those who were being severely exploited even after struggling intensely with the production system, they do not have that kind of enthusiasm. The armed Mizo rebels of those classes have not come to a compromise. They have not stood as election candidates. Then what is proved by all these incidents? Analyzing these, what strikes Thu-Aya and the Yangayas' minds most is that, in the final analysis, the national struggle is a problem of the class struggle. The struggle of the coming days has to be strengthened with this perspective.

Yes, the national struggle is a problem of the class struggle. And to advance the struggle today, it will not be enough to just focus on the small circle of the Mizo hills. The program of the struggle has to be adopted by analyzing the international situation. The Indian government has not been able to abandon the desire to eliminate the turbulent wave of the struggle of the Maoist communists and the armed Mizo rebels in the hilly regions of Chittagong in East Pakistan, which was established through various tricks and stratagems by the Mujib government. The same government that, in 1966, described the liberation war of the freedom-loving Mizos as a seditious activity and deployed troops to carry out oppression, that same government, in 1971, in the name of helping the armed liberation war of the Awami League of East Bengal, citing humanity, finally joined the war directly and defeated the soldiers of Yahya Khan. The way Yahya Khan's soldiers carried out atrocities on the people in East Bengal was very inhuman, it was beastly. The unprecedented and endless sorrow and hardship of the people in East Bengal due to the inhuman and beastly atrocities of the Khan soldiers deeply pained Indira Gandhi's heart. But when the army was carrying out atrocities on the freedom fighters of the Mizo hills and the Mizo public, was there no question of humanity? The struggle of the Mizos is a matter of separating from India. They are talking about becoming independent by separating from India. And the people of East Bengal wanted to become independent by separating from West Pakistan. Therefore, the question of humanity that was involved in the case of the people of East Bengal for Indira Gandhi cannot come in the case of the Mizo rebels. That is why today, various strategies and atrocities are going on in the Mizo hills to suppress the struggle for the full independence of the Mizo rebels.

In the Mizo hills, in the hilly regions of Chittagong, the armies of the Government of India and the Mujib government are taking measures to suppress the armed Mizo rebels. Besides that, in Burma, in the Chin and Arakan hill regions, the Ne Win government is active in suppressing the Mizo rebels. In Burma, the Zomi Liberation Front, the Communist Party of Burma, the Eastern Naga Revolutionary Council, and the armed movement of the Mizos are with the armed movement of U Nu's National United Liberation Front. There, the situation of the Ne Win government is precarious due to the armed movements of various parties and groups. In some cases, various parties and groups are jointly adopting programs to overthrow the Ne Win government. A proposal was made to the chief of the Mizo National Front, Mr. Laldenga, to overthrow the Ne Win government by adopting a joint program with them on the basis that the Mizo settlement areas in the Arakan hills, Chin hills, and the hilly Chittagong, which are included in the proposed Federal Union of Burma of the National United Liberation Front led by U Nu, will belong to the Mizos. Will the Mizo rebels under the leadership of Laldenga not strive to implement that proposal? Surely they will. As the armed struggle of the various groups and political parties there progresses, the struggle of the Mizos will also progress in a complementary way. With the progress of their struggle, the struggle of the Mizos will also progress. Gradually, with the development of various ethnic groups from the border region of the Yunnan province of China to the hilly Chittagong of Pakistan and the eastern region of India, the identity of the Mizo nation will also develop. On that day, will there not be a greater Mizoram with all the inhabitants of the Chin hills and Arakan hills of Burma, the hilly region of Chittagong, and the Mizo hills of India? All these thoughts were rising in the minds of Yangaya and General Thu-Aya.
Along with the thoughts about the link that has been formed in the armed movements of the various groups of Burma, Bangladesh, and the eastern region of India, or what form those struggles will take in the coming days, some statements from Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel's letter also repeatedly resonate in the minds of General Thu-Aya and Yangaya. Vallabhbhai Patel had written to Nehru that he was sure that China and its source of inspiration, Soviet Russia, would not misuse any opportunity to use these weak and narrow places for their own purposes, partly in support of their ideology and partly to satisfy their ambitions.

Today, the people will judge and analyze the statement and significance of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel's letter with their own inquisitive perspective. But according to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel's statement, Soviet Russia is no longer the source of inspiration for China. Rather, Soviet Russia is an object of example for China. The Khrushchev revisionists have turned the Soviet Russia of Lenin and Stalin into a social imperialist country. China is forcefully propagating this to the revolutionary people of the world. Moreover, in the armed movements of the various ethnic groups of Burma, in the armed movements of the Nagas and Mizos of the eastern region of India, the role of China is being involved from various perspectives, but Russia is not being involved in the same way. The role of Soviet Russia, the source of inspiration for China according to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, is not like the role of China in the armed movements of various ethnic groups. Centered on the movement of the Mizo National Front, it is being said that the leaders of the Zomi Liberation Front of Burma, the Communist Party of Burma, the Eastern Naga Revolutionary Council, and the Arakan Independent Army, etc., are of the opinion that the chief of the Mizo National Front, Laldenga, went to China and, through discussions with the leaders there, was initiated into a firm political ideology. It is also said that after the uprising of the Mizo rebels and the Maoist communists in Chittagong against the Mujib government, after the joint attack of the armies of the Government of India and the Mujib government to teach them a good lesson, Laldenga went to the far northeastern border region of Burma and from there again went to the Yunnan province of China.

The border of the Yunnan province of China is reached by advancing through the 7981 feet high mountain pass, which is covered with jungle, in the Chin hills on the northeastern border of Burma, and then descending. The armed liberation fighters of various rebel ethnic groups go to and from China through this path. The rebel Nagas use this path to return from China and to go to China. Laldenga also went to the Yunnan province of China through this path with his wife, Riakdiki Laldenga, four children, and his adviser, Mr. Zoramthanga. But why did Laldenga go to China? Why do the armed liberation fighters of various tribal groups of Burma go to China? Why do they go there, defying the fear of death, carrying on a constant struggle, and penetrating the inaccessible jungle-covered regions of the mountains? What hope or urge draws them there? In trying to face all these questions, various people have judged from different perspectives and have expressed different opinions. Many are saying that China is instigating various tribes to serve its own interests. It is supporting them. General Thu-Aya and Yangaya are also thinking. They are saying, yes, China is helping the rebel ethnic groups to serve its own interests. However, China's own interests are not separate from the interests of the various armed movement-waging tribes. The interests of the armed Mizo fighters of the Mizo hills are not separate from the interests of China. The interests of the armed Nagas of the Naga hills are not separate from the interests of China. Because the leaders of China are admitting that the people of various countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America should unite. All the countries that are attacked, controlled, interfered with, and humiliated by America should unite. A broadest united front should be formed to oppose the policy of aggression and the policy of war of American imperialism and to protect world peace. With this goal, today the various armed ethnic groups are jointly adopting programs against the reactionary Burmese government, which is a bearer of the standard of imperialism.

The Mizo Naga rebels of India are moving in that direction. They are carrying on an armed struggle to remove the obstacles to the development of their respective national identities. The leaders of China are firmly supporting the movements of all these ethnic groups, clinging to the principles of Marxism-Leninism of the present era. That is why the armed fighters of various ethnic groups are maintaining contact with China. That does not mean that the various ethnic groups have become completely dependent on China. Rather, by maintaining contact with China, they are learning today that they have to be self-reliant. Foreign aid can be hoped for, but it is not right to be dependent on it. They have to move forward to face the enemy with their own efforts and by relying on the creative power of their own people. General Thu-Aya and Yangaya were analyzing in this way, sitting in their secret base.

After coming out of jail, Rangchwanga at first tried to contact the fighting Mizo rebels for a few days. But after coming out of jail, the way the various forces of the government Bahadur had restricted their movements, it was not possible for him to make contact. Rangchwanga could not meet with General Thu-Aya or Yangaya. On the other hand, Yangaya and General Thu-Aya also could not meet with Rema, Rosangi, and Jaichoanga, etc. The blow that was coming from the opponent made it impossible to make contact for a long time. But it is true that the more the blow comes from the opponent, the more the ability of Yangaya, General Thu-Aya, Rema, Rosangi, etc. to resist is increasing in terms of quality.

Politics is being taken deeper to achieve the completeness of the struggle in the coming days. They are moving forward, facing all obstacles with courage, to bring about the complete development of the Mizo national identity. They are understanding today that, in the final analysis, the national struggle is a problem of the class struggle. They are understanding that to solve their problem today, it will not be enough to just analyze the real situation of the small Mizo hills. They are understanding today that they have to move forward, maintaining the link between the domestic situation and the international situation. That is why Yangaya, Thu-Aya, Rema, Rosangi, and Rangchwanga, etc., are moving forward, carrying the ideal of armed struggle, defying the fear of death. A firm directive has come to their hearts and minds.
This firm directive is leading them forward.
